Some people thrive on and promote conflict in their relationships
whilst others dread it and run for the hills at the first sign of
an issue! Either way, conflict and conflict resolution are key
components to a healthy relationship. If handled correctly it can offer a
couple a sense of stability within their relationship by knowing that when
faced with difficulties they have the tools and communication skills to
manage things.

Some people however are unaware of their own particular style of
conflict management. If you are aware of your own particular style and
that of your partner, it can enable a couple to choose to respond to a
situation thoughtfully rather than to react to it irrationally, making marital
conflict constructive rather than destructive.

*** title_m***

There are Five Basic Conflict Styles

The Competitive Partner
These are goal-orientated and often aggressive people with a need to
win or be right, sometimes at all costs! Rarely does this type of person
see a win-win situation, rather for them there has to be a winner and
a loser. This type of person is often abusive or domineering and can
be forceful and intimidating with an unapproachable style. They can be
hostile and resort to name calling, door slamming and shouting to solve
their disagreements. Their partners are forced into a ‘silent resentment’
and quickly become unhappy within the relationship. Although not ideal,
this style of conflict resolution CAN work but only in instances where
there is a crisis and quick decisions need to be made where this person
will then assume the dominant role. Partners in this relationship need to
find their voice and also be heard to avoid being bullied into submission.

Conflict Avoider
These people will withdraw or even run away from conflict. They will
deny or ignore a conflict situation, making them seem unassertive,
cowardly or uncooperative and may frustrate their partner. They will
at times sacrifice their own goals (which can lead to dissatisfaction
and unhappiness later in the relationship) and may seem naïve and
passive, offering their partner an opportunity to take advantage of their
reluctance to deal with issues. This method of conflict management
will work where trivial matters are brought up which do not warrant
lengthy debate by defusing, or where situations arise where it is useful
to acquire information to understand an issue better.

The Accommodator
Their main goal is to maintain peace and harmony and their primary aim
is to ‘smooth over’ problems as they see little gain in thrashing things
out. It is common with this type of person that they get ‘lost’ within their
relationship as they often ignore their own goals and dreams and give
in to their partners’ wishes and may come across as weak. I have seen
too many times in my counselling practice the ultimate resentment,
passive aggression and disillusionment in a person who has facilitated
this situation. Allowing their own desires to be deferred invariably leads
to trouble in a marriage. At some stage in their relationship, often years
down the line, they feel that enough is enough and they decide to try
to assert themselves. This can lead to major relationship issues as the
opposing partner has become used to this passive partner who now
feels the need to assert themselves, sometimes presenting unsolvable
challenges!

The Compromiser
A compromiser will pursue their point but are also mindful of keeping
a stability within the partnership. They are prepared to sacrifice some
of their own goals but will encourage their partner to similarly make
sacrifices within the relationship. This type of conflict style works
towards a win-win situation and the person is often assertive but cooperative
in debate. Compromise is needed and valuable where there
is no obvious solution or where partners have totally opposing views
from each other.

The Collaborator
Even if this person disagrees with their partner they will listen to what
they have to say, with a view to maintaining a stable and harmonious
relationship. Their goal is to achieve a conciliatory win-win and try to
find ways to resolve matters which are agreeable to all. This style of
communication is very useful in group situations with a number of
differing perspectives when one is trying to obtain consensus or buy-in
from all concerned.

Ideally, the aim of conflict is to find constructive solutions to joint
problems in a relationship. Given that problems will inevitably arise, it
is vital to acknowledge the role of conflict as a healthy part of a good
relationship. By knowing one’s own conflict style a person will be able
to predict to some degree how they will behave in conflict situations
and be better placed to handle these matters. Understanding these
styles in each other can minimise the risk of a minor tiff becoming a
destructive and hurtful fight and strengthen the relationship, creating a
confidence in a couple that the joint effort to resolve an issue shows that
they have the cohesiveness to weather future conflicts together without
the relationship breaking down under the pressure and disappointment
of conflict.

Janet Winterbourne is a relationships and family counsellor in private practice
(South African College of Applied Psychology Diploma in Counselling and
Communication, British Association of Counselling and Psychotherapy Member)